The lone warrior often awaits grace, the Creator's mercy,
though he had to anxiously stir by hand the frost-cold sea, travel
exile paths over the sea; Fate is fully resolute.

Thus spoke the wanderer, mindful of hardships, of
wrathful slaughter, of the fall of dear kinsmen:

"Often I had to bemoan my sorrow alone every predawn.
None is now of the living to whom I dare openly speak
my mind.  I truly know that in a warrior a noble virtue
is that he firmly bind his heart, keep close his
thoughts, think as he might.

"Neither may the weary spirit withstand fate nor may the
troubled mind provide help.  Therefore those eager for glory
often bind the sorrowful firmly in their breast.  So I,
careworn, separated from my homeland, far from
noble kinsmen, often had to bind my heart with fetters.
Since long ago, I covered my generous lord in the darkness
of earth, and, wretched, I thence traveled, sad as winter,
over the sea, in sorrow for the hall, sought a giver of
treasure, where far or near I might find one whom I knew in
my mead hall or would console me, friendless, entice me with
pleasures.

"He understands who experiences how cruel is sorrow as a
companion to him who has few dear friends.  The exile path
concerns him, not at all twisted gold; the cold body, not at
all earth's splendour.  He remembers men of the hall and
accepting treasure, how his generous lord accustomed him
to feast in youth.  Joy all perished.  Therefore, he
understands who must long forgo the teachings of his dear
friend and lord.  (29-38)

"Often when sorrow and sleep together bind the miserable
lone warrior, he dreams that he would embrace and kiss his
lord and on his lord's knee lay his hands and head, as he
sometimes formerly in days of yore enjoyed the gifting
throne.  The friendless man then awakes again, before
him sees dark waves, seabirds bathe and spread their feathers,
frost and snow fall with hail mingled.  By that, then, the
wounds of the heart sorely in mourning for the beloved are
more grievous.  (39-50)

"Sorrow is renewed when a memory of kinsmen passes through
the mind.  He greets them joyously, eagerly looks through
the companions of men.  They drift away often.  The spirit
of floating ones does not bring there many familiar tales.
Grief is renewed for him who must very often send his weary
soul over the sea.  Therefore, I cannot conceive why in the
world my spirit does not darken when I think through all the
warriors' lives, how they suddenly gave up the hall, the
brave warriors.  (50-62)

"So each and every day this world declines and falls.
Therefore, a wise man cannot become wise before he has a
share of winters in the world order.  A wise man must be
patient, must not be too hot-hearted nor too hasty in speech
nor a too weak warrior nor too reckless nor too fearful nor
too joyful nor too greedy nor ever be too eager to boast
before he clearly knows.  A man must wait when he speaks
a vow until the bold spirit knows well where the thought
of hearts would turn.  (62-72)

"The wise warrior must understand how ghostly it is when
all this world's wealth stands barren, as now, variously,
throughout this world, wind-beaten walls stand; frost-covered,
snow-swept those structures.  The wine-halls crumble, the rulers
lie deprived of joys, the warband all fell by the wall, proud.
War took away some, carried them into the way forward; a bird
bore one away over the deep sea, the grey wolf divided one in
death, one a sad-faced warrior hid in an earthen cave.  The
shaper thus depopulated this homeland of people until, lacking
the vitality of town-dwellers, old works of giants stood
empty."  (73-87)

He then deeply, with wise thought considers this wall-place
and this dark life; mature in mind, often remembers, far back,
a multitude of slaughters, and speaks these words:  (88-91)

"Where did the horse go?  Where did the warrior go?  Where did
the treasure-giver go?  Where did the seat of feasts go?
Where are the joys of the hall?  Oh, the bright cup!  Oh, the
warrior in mail!  Oh, the king's might!  How that time departed,
darkened under cover of night, as if it had not existed.
Now, on the track of the beloved warband, stands a wall
wonderously high, adorned with serpent shapes.  (92-98)

Fate the glorious seized warriors with the force of spears,
slaughter-greedy weapons, and storms thrash these stone
slopes, winter's fury, driving snow, freezes the earth.
Then darkness comes; night's shadow deepens, sends from
the north a fierce hailstorm in anger against men.
All is difficult in earth's domain.  (99-106)

The destiny of events changes the world under the heavens.
Here is treasure fleeting, here is a friend fleeting,
here is a man fleeting, here is a kinsman fleeting;
all this earth's frame becomes empty."  (107-110)

So said the wise of mind to himself as he sat alone in
contemplation.  (111) 

Good is he who keeps his word; a man should never reveal
his anger too quickly unless he already knows how the warrior
with courage is to accomplish the remedy.  (112-114)

It is well for him who for himself seeks grace, comfort
from the Father in heaven, where for us stands all the
security.  (114-115)

