In the year 937, King Athelstan, lord of noblemen, warrior's
ring-giver, and also his brother, Edmund the atheling, won
life-long glory with the edges of swords in a battle near
Brunanburh.  (1-5)

The sons of Edward cleaved the shieldwall,
hewed shields with hammered swords, as for them was natural,
from their ancestors, that they often defended land,
treasure, and homes in combat against each of their
enemies.  (5-10)

The enemy fell, Scots and Vikings doomed to fall, and the field
resounded, bold warriors, from when the sun went up in
the morning and as the glorious heavenly body glided over plains,
God's bright candle, the eternal Lord's, until the noble
creation sank to its resting place.  There lay many men
destroyed by spears, Norse men shot over the shield,
likewise Scots also, weary, sated of battle.  (10-20)

Throughout the entire day, the West Saxons, in troops, pressed
forth on the trail against the hostile nations, violently
hewed army-fugitives from behind with mill-sharpened
swords.  (20-24)

The Mercians did not withhold hard hand-play from any of the
warriors, those who with Olaf sought land over the
churning of waves against the ship's bosom, doomed to
battle.  (24-28)

Five young kings lay on the battlefield, put to death by
swords; likewise, also seven earls of Olaf and a countless
number of the army, of the fleet, and of the Scots.
There the leader of the Norsemen was put to flight, forced by
necessity to the ship's prow with a small band of
retainers.  The king hastened the boat into the sea, went out
into the pale tide, life saved.  (29-36)

Likewise, there also the wise old Constantine, the hoary
warrior, went in flight to his northern homeland, needed not
exult over the sword meeting; he was bereft of his kinsmen,
of friends felled on the battlefield, struck down in battle,
and left his son on the battlefield, destroyed, young, by
wounds in combat.  The grey-haired warrior, old and cunning,
needed not boast of the sword slaughter, nor Olaf more.
Among their army remnants, they had no need to rejoice that
they were better at battle deeds on the battlefield of the
banner clash, of the spear meeting, of the men's encounter,
of the weapon exchange; for that they fought against Edward's
sons on the slaughter-fields.  (37-52)

The Norsemen, for themselves, sad survivors of the darts,
departed in nailed ships on a noisy sea over deep water to
seek Dublin and, again, their land, feeling
disgraced.  (53-56)

Also, the brothers, both together, king and atheling, sought
home, the land of the West Saxons, exultant about the battle.
Behind them they let the dark-cloaked black raven,
horny-beaked, and the gray-cloaked white-tailed eagle
distribute the corpses, the hungry war-hawk and the gray beast,
the wolf of the forest enjoy the carrion.  (57-65)

Not ever yet on this island was more slaughter, people killed
before this by the edges of the sword, from that which books
and old scholars tell us, since from the east hither Angles and
Saxons came ashore; the proud war-smiths sought Britain over the
broad seas and overcame the Celts; earls eager for glory seized
land.  (65-74)

